# Comparative-study-from-classical-to-transformer-based-models-for-poem-genre-classification

This project focuses on the task of multi class classification on poem genres, each poem is labeled with one of the five genre topics. What is interesting is that unlike other text classification tasks, this one will require the models to be more sensitive with the abstract concepts and symbolic language that is presented in poems. This will require models to handle ambiguous languages and go beyond surface level text analysis to gain deeper semantic understanding, the more traditional NLP methods or shallow neural networks models may struggle to capture and under perform. The motivation behind this project came from the interest in applying NLP techniques to a more creative and interpretive task and comparing the difference between the model performances. Automatically classifying poem genres can help in literature
research, educational purposes and more. Specially, it can give a rigorous test results by evaluating the capabilities of classic and modern NLP models in understanding abstract literature that even human may struggle with. The main research questions that guides this study are the following: How effective can classic and modern NLP techniques classify poems by theme? How much can the models improve after fine tuning? How do the various different models compare? To explore these questions, a series of experiments were conducted, from classic NLP pipelines (TF-IDF + logistic regression) to deep learning (Word2Vec + Feed Forward Neural Network), and lastly to transformer based models like BERT and DeBERTa-v3-small. Each model was evaluated using a stratified dataset of english poems categorized into five themes.The main contributions achieved at the end of this work are: A detailed comparison of the various NLP models for thematic poem classification. Implementation and tuning of pretrained and non pretrained models on a poetry dataset. Analysis of the impact of input length, class imbalance, and batch size on classification performance.
